---
layout: standalone
title: "Ephemerides #1"
---

<style id="ic">
aside {
	opacity: 0.5;
	font-size: small;
}
#ic:target ~ aside { display: none; }
</style>

<dl><dt>Ephemeris <i>n. (plural ephemerides)</i></dt><dd>A table giving the apparent position of celestial bodies throughout the year; normally given as right ascension and declination.</dd></dl>

<hr>

.. html:: aside

	Welcome to the writer's commentary (and also my personal writing notes) for Ephemerides!

	The idea for this whole thing kinda came to me as a reaction to the organisational complexity of a West Marches D&D campaign I was in.
	And also D&D and its quirks (negative) in general.
	But I still wanted to worldbuild and create stories, which in a moment of inspiration I realised didn't need to be embedded in TTRPGs ("we did it, temmie discovers writing again" as a friend said).
	And that's how this project was born.

	Cassie also suggested we do a collaborative play-by-post -- without her to talk about this project it would've almost certainly died before it began.

	Anyways, this isn't *actually* systemless, because that is too much of a blank page for me to crystallise my ideas.
	I'm actually adapting Wanderhome, which I haven't played that much but am a really big fan of.
	The vibes of it align pretty well with the sort of tone I want, and it provides enough of a framework to support the actual worldbuilding ideas I wanna put in.

You found yourself lost in the newly-sown fields during the night, and surrounded by curious critters as dawn broke.
They watched you until you were found by kind farming folk, and brought to this rickety shed.
You'll be okay.

This place is not your home, no.
There's not much for you here, other than tending to the crops and the critters I suppose.

.. html:: aside

	It took me a while to come up with the premise of the first edition though, trying to answer *why* they're going on a journey.
	But to spoil it, "you" are a fallen star that the narrator is taking home.
	I actually intend on having the Narrator be a full-blown character with a playbook -- tentatively the Poet -- but I'm keeping that mostly hidden until later.

	> **Home**, a place that is a *Farm* and a *Hillock*.
	>
	> It can always:
	>
	> - Describe the calm mundanity of everyday life.
	> - Reveal the thin margins people live on.
	> - Ask: "Hey, wanna help out?" Give them a token if they pitch in, in whatever way they can.
	> - Describe what we stand in the shadows of.
	> - Show a threat that's up ahead.
	> - Ask: "What are you worried lies up ahead?" and give them a token if they're right.
	>
	> Its aesthetics are:
	>
	> - Crops As Far As The Eye Can See
	> - Peaceful Livestock
	> - A Sheltered Valley
	> - Evidence Of Distant Strangeness

	Funnily enough there's the "The Fallen Star And The Stories She Told" folklore for Hillock, which is basically our premise!

Your home is... far from here, very far, in a very foreign land.
One where there's snow in the cooler months, and you could walk on the lakes and slide on the ground.
There isn't that here, only hot months that make you dizzy.

That's okay though, you won't be heading back alone.

.. html:: aside

	I'm gonna be honest, I'm not entirely sure how to do the "Evidence of distant strangeness" here...
	I want it to be another motivator for the narrator to go.

	Couple ideas:

	- News of weather phenomenon.
		I'm kinda ruling this out since it doesn't make much sense in-universe?
		Unless... something magic?
	- I feel seeing an aurora would also be a nice place to end, even if it doesn't mean that much narratively at the moment.
	- Oh! Maybe the star fell here to bring a message as well? And we're bringing something back? Maybe like a sister city kind of thing?

.. html:: aside

	Also: making the world more fleshed out, so there'll be stuff I (and maybe others!) can latch onto.

	This is kinda transcribed from a conversation with Cassie.

	- World narrative idea: we killed the gods -- the rebellion was about overthrowing the gods.
		Raises the obvious questions of, why and how :>
	- Cardinal directions: getting the sun direction and prevailing wind direction, and using that to ground faraway places.
	- People carrying spores/pollen/other plants from faraway places.
		Like burrs!
