---
layout: post
title: Even More Concepts in C++14 (part 1)
tags: c-cpp
excerpt: Implementing concepts in C++14 in under 50 lines
---

Despite Concepts Lite not making it into the standard (yet), there is still an
extensive use of them in the standard library. It has its place in user
libraries as well (most notable [ranges-v3][1]), providing a friendlier tool to
use alongside SFINAE. Today, I'll provide (yet another) C++14-compatible
implementation of them.

  [1]: https://github.com/ericniebler/range-v3

<!--more-->

> *Update, several years later:* I never got around to making a second article.
> Also, we've got actual concepts in C++20 now, so there's that.

## Previous Work

Many other libraries have also been made to support concepts in c++. For
example, [Tick][2], which provides concept checking in C++11 (albeit with some
macros) and [concepts in ranges-v3][3], which is a completely library-only
solution (no preprocessor!). However, both those libraries are decently heavy -
Tick is a whole library, and the ranges-v3 implementation requires the meta
template metaprogramming library (unless you go back far enough in the commit
history).

  [2]: https://github.com/pfultz2/Tick
  [3]: https://github.com/ericniebler/range-v3/blob/e411a19a312542be98ec9f318ef5b335e0fdaf0a/include/range/v3/utility/concepts.hpp

## Yet Another Concepts Library

I've been able to make a single header implementation in under 200 lines, with
the core component taking less than 50 lines. The syntax is similar to
ranges-v3's implementation, declaring the requirements in the return type of a
template member function. Concept checking is also similar.

``` c++
// Concept definition
struct EqualityComparable
{
	static void implicit_bool(bool);

	template <typename T>
	auto requires_(T&& a) -> decltype(implict_bool(a == a));
};

// Concept checking
static constexpr bool int_models_ec = concepts::models<EqualityComparable, int>::value;
```

## Core Implementation

The implementation is somewhat based off of ranges-v3's implementation, and uses
overload  resolution to determine if a concept is matched. No `void_t` detection
idiom required.

``` c++
template <typename...>
auto models_(...) -> std::false_type;
```
This catch-all function is the fallback if the concept is not matched. This
ensures that the overload set is not empty after SFINAE. The ellipses (`...`)
parameter list is a variadic parameter list (whose actual use is effectively
replaced by templates), which accepts any and all arguments. The caller cleans
this up, so it's all OK. Besides, this should never be actually called.

``` c++
template <typename... Ts, typename Concept,
	typename = decltype(
		std::declval<Concept&>()
			.template requires_<Ts...>(std::declval<Ts>()...)
		)>
auto models_(Concept*) -> std::true_type;
```

This is the part of the concept checking that does all the work. It uses SFINAE
to remove it (and falling back to the other one) if the return type is not
well-formed for the given template types. Why a pointer as an argument? I'm not
sure, I was just following Eric Niebler's implementation ([which also uses a
pointer][4]).  I'm guessing it bypasses having to use `declval` and that kind of
stuff, while still getting the concept type.

  [4]: https://github.com/ericniebler/range-v3/blob/e411a19a312542be98ec9f318ef5b335e0fdaf0a/include/range/v3/utility/concepts.hpp#L112

## Helpers

These are just a few helpers to make defining and checking concepts easier:

``` c++
template <typename Concept, typename... Ts>
using models = decltype(models_<Ts...>(static_cast<Concept*>(nullptr)));

template <typename... Ts>
void valid_expr(Ts&&...);

template <typename...>
using exists = int;
```

The `models` alias wraps `models_()`, providing a friendlier interface.
`valid_expr` checks if all expressions passed are valid (e.g.
`decltype(valid_expr(i++, ++i))`). `exists` is the same, but with types (e.g.
`exists<typename T::value_type, typename T::reference>`).

## Refining Concepts?

Right now, the implementation does directly support refining concepts. You can
do this in a roundabout way with `enable_if`, but it's quite non-natural
considering how common refinement is:

``` c++
template <typename T>
requires_(T&&) -> exists<
		decltype(/*whatever you're checking*/),
		std::enable_if_t<models</* base concept */, T>>
	>;
```

That's why there's going to be part 2 (when I decide to make it).

All code is on [Github][5].

  [5]: https://gist.github.com/ralismark/e30a1f4988748d4f700da44fef36c606
