---
layout: post
title: RSI
tags: other
---

I had a mild encounter with RSI and it was not fun.

<!--more-->

# Cause

I don't have a PC, instead using my laptop for everything. It's much more portable and convenient, especially since you don't need to transfer files between devices. However, it's quite easy to have bad ergonomics when using a laptop - and in my case, it was quite bad.

A while ago, I built a stand for my laptop out of Lego, since I wanted to elevate the screen a bit. However, this also caused the keyboard to be tilted up, so you had to also tilt your wrists up to use it. This causes [dorsiflextion], which is bad! I also rested my arms directly on the hard table, which was also bad[^1]. These combined to eventually cause wrist pain, though initially it wasn't too bad (It would go away after a night's rest), it was still a problem.

[dorsiflextion]: http://www.rsipainrelief.com/images/164.dorsiflexion.jpg

[^1]: Not sure of the exact explanation of this, it might be due to the hard table applying pressure to nerves/blood vessels (including wrist).

# Looking for solutions

One of the first things I did was to get a separate keyboard - a pretty cheap Dell membrane one, which I could keep close to the edge of the table. Secondly, I elevated the front of my keyboard (i.e. negative tilt), though without a hight enough chair, it didn't help much. From looking around on the internet, I also discovered the novel idea of [palm keys], which I found from [Xah Lee]. Since I also used CapsLock + HJKL for arrow keys (which required the pinkie as well), using palm keys was quite beneficial. It was also easier to hit the modifiers with my palms due to the negative tilt.

[palm keys]: <https://www.reddit.com/r/emacs/comments/7zvw2b/

[Xah Lee]: http://ergoemacs.org/emacs/emacs_pinky.html

<!-- image of palm keys -->

# Future Plans

I plan on building a split mechanical keyboard with tenting, both as a hobby and to further reduce flexing my wrists. Currently have some parts, and am getting the rest delivered.

<!-- image of Keebio parts -->
